From the New York Times, I'm Rachel
Abrams and this is the daily.
Early Monday morning, thousands of
people had already gathered in what's
become known as hostage square in Tel
Aviv.
>> So happy right now. I stayed awake all
night just to see it everything. It's
amazing that everybody's coming back.
And news broke that the first group of
hostages had returned to Israel,
starting in exchange for Palestinian
prisoners and detainees that was
expected to begin later in the day.
Over the past few days, the world has
seen dramatic scenes unfold from Israel
and Gaza.
In Gaza, thousands of Palestinians are
returning to their homes and their
neighborhoods, and they're seeing
firsthand the devastation that 2 years
of war has brought.
[Applause]
>> As international journalists continue to
wait for access to the strip,
[Music]
[Applause]
Today I talk with families of hostages
and other Israelis in hostage square
about this long anticipated moment and
also with my colleague Isabel Kersner
about why the hostages have been so
pivotal in the efforts to end the war.
It's Monday, October 13th.
[Music]
>> Ladies and gentlemen, we welcome you to
Vanura International Airport here in Tel
Aiv. And our arrival time is
approximately 9. As the ceasefire took
effect in Gaza, I flew to Israel with
daily producer Claire Tennisceter to ask
people how they're feeling and what
they're thinking. So, we just got off
the plane. We haven't even been walking
maybe 5 minutes. And all along this very
brightly lit hallway are pictures of the
hostages.
And within minutes of arriving, we
started seeing reminder after reminder
of the remaining hostages in Gaza. They
list the ages of the hostages on some of
these posters and some of them are
crossed out with new ages as they've I
guess gotten older.
>> This guy 34 crossed out 35 crossed out
now it says 36. So as soon as we dropped
off our luggage we went straight to
what's become the epicenter of the push
to return the hostages to Israel. A
place known as hostage square.
[Music]
It's a concrete public plaza between an
art museum and a public library. and
it's across the street from the Israeli
military's headquarters.
And in the weeks and months following
October 7th, this place developed into a
sort of living interactive memorial to
the hostages that were taken on that
day. What's going on over in this?
>> So, this is uh actually like a little
synagogue. It's
>> there are big white canvas tents. Some
of them are for shade. Some of them are
sort of information booths. uh the tent
of prayer and good deeds,
>> t-shirts, hats, flags,
>> and there are little pop-up stores
selling t-shirts and books and pins,
>> the yellow ribbons, and uh
>> but the whole space has become a kind of
remembrance area.
>> Can you tell us what you're doing?
>> I write a message for the for the
hostages.
>> Every square inch of this place seems
like it has a photo of a hostage or a
message for them or some kind of
momento. And there are other things that
feel very specific to this place and to
this war.
[Music]
>> There's a piano that anybody can come up
and play because one hostage loved to
play the piano.
>> Can you describe what we're looking at?
>> It's the remaking of the tunnel.
>> And there's even kind of an interactive
artistic replica of a Hamas tunnel where
the hostages are believed to be held.
I remember the tunnel from the last time
I was in Israel over the summer when it
felt so different. There was no hostage
deal in sight. The mood was somber and
despondent, angry. But now coming back,
>> um we're very, very, very happy. This
war is coming to an end. And we're just
>> The mood was optimistic and people were
excited.
>> We're so happy. So we celebrate. So we
are offering a free cake for everyone.
>> Free cake.
>> Yeah.
The other remarkable difference,
>> we really have to thank America for the
the deal, especially Donald Trump,
>> was that there were outpours of
gratitude for President Trump and his
role in brokering the hostage deal.
>> Can you tell me what your sign says?
>> Thank you, President Trump. Because we
want him to know that we are thanking
him from the bottom of our hearts.
>> The square is where the families of the
hostages have come since the beginning
of the war, demanding that the military
and the government bring their loved
ones home. And it's also where thousands
of supporters and protesters have come
to weekly rallies to show solidarity and
support for those families.
And so after we spent some time taking
in the scene, we asked a few family
members to talk to us about how they
were feeling just hours before the final
hostages were supposed to come home.
>> Tell us who you are and why you're here
today.
>> I'm the brother-in-law of held hostage
for two years now. I'm here. We met
Mosha Levie in the lobby of the library
along the square where families of
hostages sometimes go to get away from
the crowds
>> and it was very important for the
family.
>> Mosha was wearing a t-shirt with a
picture of his brother-in-law Omry
holding up one of his two young
daughters in the air.
>> Omri has two young daughters. They were
held captive themselves on that day with
my sister luckily rescued and um hoping
that this will end. I just arrived
yesterday with my sister Lishai from DC.
That's where we got the good news and we
rushed back here and I'm very excited to
finally conclude this chapter.
>> When you think of Omri, do you have a
image that comes to mind?
>> Omri for me is always going to be
the smiling man who made my sister happy
after difficult years. It's the love of
her life. That's what I have in my mind.
You know, the the smiling face, the
bashful eyes, and and the heart, these
this big heart that entered our family.
>> If you had to guess, what do you think
Omry's the first thing Omry will want to
do is when he gets home.
>> No, I don't want to suppose what he
wants to do. He didn't have a choice for
two years. And um ever since we received
the news, our focus is now on
preparations
from small things like preparing a bag
to
>> a bag
>> a bag for a muri because when he
arrives, he would want to see wants to
wear something that is not what
terrorists forced him to wear.
[Music]
>> Have you thought about the first thing
you want to say to him?
just a hug.
>> Yeah.
[Music]
>> And um and primarily I just want to see
my sister and nieces hug him. I'm I'm
not important for that. I hope they'll
have that moment
and I hope it will be the most beautiful
moment in their life.
[Music]
Family members like Mosha are in so many
different situations. Some of them are
waiting for hostages they know are
alive. For others, they don't know.
They're uncertain. And it's unclear how
much hope they should have, but still
they hope to be on the cusp of some kind
of ending.
>> Thank you so much for us. It's a
difficult day.
>> Another person we met at Hostage Square
who had a family member go missing
during the war was Ruby Hen.
>> I'm a New Yorker, grew up in Flatbush,
and I met my wife in Israel and we
decided to have a home here.
>> Ruby and his wife raised their three
kids in Israel, but would frequently
travel to the US. My eldest inherited my
love for the New York Knicks and he ties
being the middle son, the more
rebellious one. He decided to be a
Celtics fan for the love of God. I don't
know how that happened, but I feel that
I failed as a father because
>> and when the war broke out, one of his
sons, it the one with the rebellious
streak was performing his mandatory
military service. and he unlike his uh
elder sibling that went to a technology
unit uh he'd of course decided to do
something totally different and he
wanted to go into combat and he joined
the tanks division and he on that fatal
October 7th was uh on uh the board of
Gaza at a base called Nahal Oz Oz which
is kind of in the middle of the Gaza
Strip and they
were ambushed. They got hit by a few
anti- tank missiles and the tank was
neutralized and we were totally in the
dark. Monday we went to the missing
people command center that was put
together by the uh police and they said
well he's missing in action meaning no
one is able to identify him physically
standing next to him. we wasn't in one
of the hospitals
and a few days after we uh got notified
that he is indeed a hostage in Gaza
and we're sitting there and uh okay do
you have anything else to tell us? Where
is he now? Oh, we don't know. Okay, then
we're doing
>> So they waited hoping for a positive
signated
>> desperate for information on how their
son was doing. In March 24,
uh, we got another knock on the door.
>> Then a few months later,
>> Ruby got a very different message
>> where the IDF concluded based on
intelligence that he most likely did not
survive on October 7th. And we asked,
okay, where's the physical evidence? He
says, oh, we don't have that. So, we
understand, we looked at, I looked at
the intelligence. I understand that most
likely Tai is not one of the 20, but he
is no less of a hostage.
[Music]
You know, there's the missing holidays,
you know, Thanksgiving to Hanukkah to,
you know, Easter and just, you know,
think of a family dinner, holiday dinner
with a chair that is empty.
You know, Tai going back to the Celtics.
you know, now is the beginning of
basketball season. We will be sitting on
the couch, you know, thinking about and
jabbing one another who has a better
chance of winning the division title and
we will play uh NBA 2K and he will play
with the Celtics. I'd play with the
Knicks. He would of course beat me
because he's much better at 2K than I am
and he's missing.
It is just as important to us to get
Itai back and then we'll deal with the
two options that we have. Either being
able to hug him or it means that one
chapter ended and we need to start
another chapter of our family. But we
need to have that ending of this
chapter.
>> Thank you so much.
[Music]
Some of the family members at the square
have the answers that people like Ruby
are dreading. They know that their
relatives are dead, but they come here
for different reasons. They come to
support other people. They come out of a
sense of solidarity.
They come because they understand what
it means to wait for these kinds of
answers and to finally get them.
[Music]
Can you tell me to start just who you
are and why you're here tonight?
>> Okay. So, my name is Kit Pali Katir. I'm
the daughter of Ramy Katir who was
murdered on October 7th in Kibbutz Niro.
My mother Khan Katir was abducted from
Kibbutni Ros. And my brother Alad was
also kidnapped from Kibutznos.
My mom returned after 49 days in
captivity in Gaza. and my brother
Allahad was murdered in captivity and
his body was retrieved to Israel on um
April 2024
when my mother came back. I remember
when she she was brought on a journey
and and she looked like up and she saw
me and she saw my sister and then I
could see that she's looking about the
the missing faces. She couldn't see my
father and she couldn't see my brother
and she asked me where are they and I
have to tell her like on the first 5
minutes she's with us that uh my father
her husband was shot to death and that
my brother for me it was good news. I
told her mom but you know the good news
is that he's kidnapped and he's alive
and it's crazy that even considered to
be a good news but for us it was a good
news I remember when they told us that
he's dead. So my mom she was in the
hospital at this at the time and she
told the officer that she wants her son
my brother to be brought to her so she
can kiss him goodbye. And then the
officer was shocked and he he told her
like,
"We can't bring him over. You you can't
kiss him goodbye because his body wasn't
in a state that she could have done
that." And it's awful because
the the sense of closure is it's not
full because
we don't get to have this normal phases
of grief and and goodbye. Um,
>> meanwhile, Carme's mom was struggling
more and more with her health, suffering
from ailments related to her captivity.
>> She steadily declined and passed away
last year.
>> It's a huge difference between what I've
been through with my father or my
brother or with her because with her we
have the the opportunity and the
privilege to to say goodbye, to say how
much we love her, to hold her hands, for
her not to feel alone for a second. And
we didn't have that with my brother and
we didn't have that with my father. And
this make this feeling of closure very
different.
>> The people here, the families, there are
so many families who are anticipating
having their loved ones returned.
What does that feel like as somebody
that also was in that position?
>> I I'm struggling all the time for 736
days today. I'm fighting for the release
of all hostages. This is my main goal in
life and of course I'm so thrilled that
it's finally happening. Uh but of course
like emotionally it's so complicated
because you know tomorrow people are
going to hug their loved ones and I'm
not going to have this hug forever.
How do you think the country has changed
and how much of that change is permanent
and how much will go away when the war
is over?
>> I feel that this war has been too much
and too long and too devastating both
for Israelis and for Palestinians, for
Gazan people. Uh, I feel like the loss
and the ruins both in Israel and in the
and in Gaza,
it will take years and decades to
rebuild something new. I'm not talking
about the, you know, the house or the
the homes or the neighborhoods. I'm
talking about the the possibility of
living
one next to each other.
And I feel like there is a crisis of
trust or of confident between the
Israeli people and and its leadership.
So I feel that in the end of the war,
none of us is feeling more safe and it's
sad to say that.
[Music]
Coming up next, I speak with my
colleague Isabelle Kersner on what the
return of the hostages means more
broadly for Israeli society and for the
end of the war.
We'll be right back.
Isabelle, thanks so much for talking to
us. We are speaking at this moment when
there are enormous scenes unfolding not
just where you and I are in Israel, but
also in Gaza where hundreds of thousands
of people are going back to their homes
and their neighborhoods which have been
largely destroyed to try to figure out
how to start rebuilding their lives. And
international journalists are still
waiting for access to Gaza. We're not
allowed in there. In the meantime, I
wanted to come to Israel where there was
this seismic event happening which is
the return of the hostages. So just to
start, can you remind us who are the
hostages as a whole?
Sure, Rachel. So the hostages were taken
captive during the Hamasled attack on
Israel on October 7th, 2023.
And at the time about 250 people were
taken captive and taken back to Gaza.
They included many civilians, women,
children, grandparents, and some
soldiers. In the intervening two years
of war, we've had in the past two brief
temporary ceasefires
where some hostages were exchanged for
some Palestinian prisoners from Israeli
jails and the women and children for the
most part were returned. Some of the
younger men who were considered to be in
the most vulnerable states physically
were returned. And what we're expecting
is early Monday morning for the 20 live
hostages to all be returned more or less
at the same time. They're mainly men,
mostly young men, mostly civilians, and
some a small number of soldiers.
And then the remains of 26 more people
who were either killed or died in
captivity.
Some are supposed to also be returned
later in the day on Monday, but the
authorities have been saying that uh it
will be much harder to locate all the
remains. Some might be buried in places
that very few people know where they are
and so it could take much longer to
return all of them. Can you remind us
Isabelle how these hostage returns have
worked in the past just mechanically and
what is different about this time?
>> Of course. So in the past what we've
seen largely are these ceremonies where
Hamas militants would kind of in a show
of force build a stage and bring out
some of the hostages in small groups
surrounded by masked gunmen. Sometimes
be made to wave to the crowd or to give
little speeches. This time around, we
understand that Hamas is supposed to not
be holding these ceremonies. So, we
might not see very much at the
beginning, but the idea is they will be
handed over to representatives of the
Red Cross in Gaza. They will then be
transported and handed over to Israeli
military and will be brought over the
border into a an Israeli military base
called Rahim, which is uh in southern
Israel. And that's where they usually
get their initial checks to see what
their condition is and are reunited with
close family members. And you know, you
ask what's different this time. Um, so
much is different this time. I mean, for
one thing, these hostages have been in
captivity for 2 years, so nobody really
knows what their condition is. We've
seen some hostage videos released by
Hamas over the months where some have
appeared extremely emaciated and
skeletal and very, very distressed. And
you know, it's very unclear what the
condition will be of those coming out
alive. And for the Palestinians, too.
The Israelis are releasing more than 200
Palestinian prisoners who were convicted
of life terms for serious deadly attacks
against Israelis, plus almost 2,000
about 1,700 plus detainees from Gaza who
were detained by Israeli forces during
the war and brought to Israel. So it
it's a a very large landmark occasion on
all sides. One of our producers, Claire
Tennis Getter and I spent last night,
Saturday night, at Hostage Square, where
there have been weekly rallies in
support of bringing the hostages home
since the beginning of the war. And last
night was one of, if not the biggest
crowd that has ever been there,
according to a bunch of different
reports. Can you talk about the
significance of the hostages to the war
and to Israeli society and how that's
changed since the start of all of this?
>> Well, there's an ethos in Israel that's
largely been nurtured through the
Israeli military, which is a
conscription army. So, you know, most
people in Israel, their children or
their siblings, somebody they know,
their neighbors will be serving or will
have been serving in the military. And
the ethos because it's a so-called
people's army particularly has been that
you never leave soldiers behind in the
field. And there's been a feeling that's
grown over the two years as these
captives have languished longer and
longer that the Israeli government had
essentially abandoned these people and
left them in the field. So the square
has become a kind of fulcrum of uh anger
and frustration as successive rounds of
hostage talks collapsed and ceasefires
collapsed and and this war seemed to be
turning into a forever war. And now of
course, you know, you experienced a
complete uh flip and switch in the
atmosphere to actually seeing some light
at the end of this and seeing the
hostages about to come back and seeing
this war end, which a majority of
Israelis has been calling for. I mean,
in every single opinion poll for months
and months and months, you've had a
majority cutting across political lines
saying that they favored prioritizing
a hostage deal and a return of the
hostages over continuing the war. I was
really struck by how many people were
carrying signs saying, "Thank you, Mr.
President," with pictures of President
Trump on them. There was one guy
actually dressed as President Trump
holding a sign that said Nobel Peace
Prize, like indicating he should get it,
which obviously a lot of people have
talked about how he wants to get the
Nobel Peace Prize. And in the speeches
that we heard, particularly in Steve
Whit's speech, that's the Middle East
envoy for the Trump administration.
Every time Witco mentioned Trump, the
crowd would go nuts and cheer and clap.
And every time Witoff mentioned Prime
Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, people
would boo. And I wonder what you make of
that.
>> Yeah, that was quite stunning to see
actually, Rachel. I mean, the cheer that
went up as Witoff and Jared Kushner and
Ivanka Trump walked through the crowd
and and took the podium and the
electrifying atmosphere and yes, this
massive gratitude and appreciation of
the Trump administration's role and
President Trump personally in in getting
this done. And then as you mentioned,
you know, this extended prolonged booing
that uh accompanied every time Wickoff
mentioned Netanyahu's name, there's a
lot of anger still against the
government for Netanyahu's refusal to
take responsibility personally for, you
know, the failures, the intelligence
failures, the policy failures that
occurred on his watch. And you know, I
think that's what you were seeing last
night in the square. And there was
immediately afterward a lot of
discussion on the panel shows on TV
about, you know, whether it was
appropriate or not, but it was just a
very genuine, authentic, spontaneous
response and nobody had planned it or
rehearsed it. And I think it was just,
you know, very reflective of of how
people have felt here.
>> What are we watching for now? What are
people expecting to happen next?
>> Yeah, that's the golden question. Nobody
really knows this deal.
It was very vague. Um, other than the
first phase of it, which is the hostage
for Palestinian prisoner exchange and an
increase in aid going into the Gaza
Strip as well as a Israeli pullback.
There's already been an initial pull
back of forces to a defense line within
the Gaza Strip. Beyond that, there are a
lot of open questions which do raise
concerns about the, you know, fragility
of of such a deal. And I think that's
why we're also seeing on Monday after
President Trump makes this sort of
lightning 4-hour visit to Israel, he's
then going on to Charal Shik in in Egypt
for what he's calling a peace summit led
by himself and the president of Egypt
where they've invited world leaders and
the Arab partners to sort of buttress
and support this deal. And I think, you
know, the idea is just to create as
strong a coalition as possible and as
broad as possible of countries who are
just going to try and make sure that uh
this holds. I mean, whatever happens
next, clearly people in Israel at least
are celebrating the end of the war. It
feels to them like we have reached the
end of the war with this first phase.
Does that seem fair to you?
>> Yes. I think Israelis for the large part
are relieved after 2 years.
There's little appetite in Israel to
continue fighting. It's a very cysifian
task really. You're in a insurgency
situation and it just seemed to be a
kind of stalemate.
But does it mean peace? Does it mean the
Israeli Palestinian conflict has been
resolved? Absolutely not.
[Music]
I mean, the fundamental issues remain,
but it certainly brings this 2-year
chapter to some kind of close, however
unclear the future looks.
Isabelle, thank you so much.
>> Thank you.
Here's
[Music]
what else you need to know today.
Over the weekend, President Trump said
that he would pay members of the
military during the government shutdown,
tapping into about $8 billion of
Pentagon funds.
It would cover the next pay period for
more than a million active duty service
members. But it's not clear how long the
administration could pay troops if
Congress and the White House can't reach
a spending deal.
Meanwhile, the Smithsonian Institution
said on Sunday that the shutdown has
forced it to close its 21 museums and
the National Zoo.
Today's episode was produced by Claire
Tennis, Rob Zipco, and Michael Simon
Johnson. It was edited by Patricia
Willins and Ben Calhoun.
Contains music by Rowan Nisto, Dan
Powell, Marian Lozano, Leah Shaw
Damaron, and Alicia Beub, and was
engineered by Alyssa Moxley. Special
thanks to Gabby Soberman and Aaron
Boxerman.
[Music]
That's it for the Daily. I'm Rachel
Abrams. See you tomorrow.
[Music]